After nearly 10 years of
debate, COP29’s carbon
trading deal is
seriously flawed
Kate Dooley Published: November 25, 2024 5.35am
GMT
Negotiators at the COP29 climate conference in Baku
have struck a landmark agreement on rules governing the
global trade of carbon credits, bringing to a close almost a
decade of debate over the controversial scheme.
The deal paves the way for a system in which countries or
companies buy credits for removing or reducing
greenhouse gas emissions elsewhere in the world, then
count the reductions as part of their own climate efforts.
Some have argued the agreement provides crucial
certainty to countries and companies trying to reach net-
zero through carbon trading, and will harness billions of
dollars for environmental projects.
However, the rules contain several serious flaws that years
of debate have failed to fix. It means the system may
essentially give countries and companies permissions to
keep polluting.
COP29 wrapped up over the weekend, and included a deal on rules for global carbon
trading. Rafiq Maqbool/AP
What is carbon offsetting?
Carbon trading is a system where countries, companies or
other entities buy or sell “credits”, or permits, that allow
the buyer to offset the greenhouse gas emissions they
produce.
For example, an energy company in Australia that
produces carbon emissions by burning coal may, in
theory, offset their impact by buying credits from a
company in Indonesia that removes carbon by planting
trees.
Other carbon removal activities include renewable energy
projects, and projects that retain vegetation rather than
cutting it down.
Carbon trading was a controversial part of the global Paris
climate deal clinched in 2015.
The relevant part of the deal is known as “Article 6”. It sets
the rules for a global carbon market, supervised by the
United Nations, which would be open to companies as
well as countries. Article 6 also includes trade of carbon
credits directly between countries, which has begun
operating even while rules were still being finalised.
Rules for carbon trading are notoriously complex and
difficult to negotiate. But they are important to ensure a
scheme reduces greenhouse gas emissions in reality, not
just on paper.
Retaining vegetation is one way to store carbon. Parks Australia
A long history of debate
Over the past few years, annual COP meetings made
some progress on advancing the carbon trading rules.
For example, COP26 in Glasgow, held in 2021, established
an independent supervisory body. It was also tasked with
other responsibilities such as recommending standards
for carbon removal and methods to guide the issuing,
reporting and monitoring of carbon credits.
But the recommendations were rejected at COP meetings
in 2022 and 2023 because many countries viewed them
as weak and lacking a scientific basis.
At a meeting in October this year, the supervisory body
published its recommendations as “internal standards”
and so bypassed the COP approval process.
At this year’s COP in Baku, the Azerbaijani hosts rushed
through adoption of the standards on day one, prompting
claims proper process had not been followed
For the remaining two weeks of the conference,
negotiators worked to further develop the rules. A final
decision was adopted over the weekend, but has
attracted criticism.
For example, the Climate Land Ambition and Rights
Alliance says the rules risk “double counting” – which
means two carbon credits are issued for only one unit of
emissions reduction. It also claims the rules fail to prevent
harm to communities – which can occur when, say,
Indigenous Peoples are prevented from accessing land
where tree-planting or other carbon-storage projects are
occurring.
Carbon trading rules have been contentious at successive COP meetings. Anatoly
Maltsev/EPA
Getting to grips with carbon removal
The new agreement, known formally as the Paris
Agreement Trading Mechanism, is fraught with other
problems. Most obvious is the detail around carbon
removals.
Take, for example, the earlier scenario of a coal-burning
company in Australia offsetting emissions by buying
credits from a tree-planting company in Indonesia. For the
climate to benefit, the carbon stored in the trees should
remain there as long as the emissions produced from the
company’s burning of coal remains in the atmosphere.
But, carbon storage in soils and forests is considered
temporary. To be considered permanent, carbon must be
stored geologically (injected into underground rock
formations).
The final rules agreed to at Baku, however, fail to stipulate
the time periods or minimum standards for “durable”
carbon storage.
Temporary carbon removal into land and forests should
not be used to offset fossil fuel emissions, which stay in
the atmosphere for millennia. Yet governments are already
over-relying on such methods to achieve their Paris
commitments. The weak new rules only exacerbate this
problem.
To make matters worse, in 2023, almost no carbon was
absorbed by Earth’s forests or soils, because the warming
climate increased the intensity of drought and wildfires.
This trend raises questions about schemes that depend
on these natural systems to capture and store carbon.
Temporary carbon removal into land and forests should not be used to offset fossil fuel
emissions. Shutterstock
What next?
Countries already can, and do, trade carbon credits under
the Paris Agreement. Centralised trading will occur under
the new scheme once the United Nations sets up a
registry, expected next year.
Under the new scheme, Australia should rule out buying
credits for land-based offsets (such as in forests and soil)
to compensate for long-lasting emissions from the energy
and industry sectors.
Australia should also revise its national carbon trading
scheme along the same lines.
We could also set a precedent by establishing a
framework that treats carbon removals as a complement
— not a substitute — for emissions reduction.
